.TH CODE-INDEXER 1 "2026-04-04" "1.0.0" "code-indexer manual"

.SH NAME
code-indexer \- index source code into SQLite and query it

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B code-indexer
.I command
.RI [ options ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B code-indexer
parses TypeScript and Kotlin source files using Tree-sitter, extracts
symbols (functions, classes, interfaces, methods, types) and references,
and stores everything in a SQLite database.

The primary use case is enabling precise, token-efficient context retrieval
for LLMs working with large codebases \(em instead of dumping raw files into
a prompt, you query the database for exactly the context you need.

.SH COMMANDS

.TP
.BR "index " \fI<dir>\fR
Recursively index all TypeScript (.ts, .tsx) and Kotlin (.kt, .kts) files
under \fIdir\fR. Files are hashed (SHA-256) so re-running only re-indexes
changed files.

Progress lines are written to stderr. Nothing is written to stdout.

.RS
.B Options:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-db " path"
Path to the SQLite database file. Default: ./code-indexer.db
.RE
.RE

.TP
.BR "find-symbol " \fI<name>\fR
Find symbol definitions by exact name. Returns one line per match.

.RS
.B Output format:
.RS
kind TAB name TAB path TAB startLine-endLine
.RE

.B Options:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-kind " kind"
Filter by symbol kind. Values: function, class, interface, method,
variable, type, enum.
.TP
.BI \-\-lang " lang"
Filter by language. Values: typescript, kotlin.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output as NDJSON (one JSON object per line).
.RE
.RE

.TP
.BR "find-refs " \fI<name>\fR
Find all references to an identifier (every occurrence that is not a
definition). Returns one line per reference.

.RS
.B Output format:
.RS
path TAB line TAB column
.RE

.B Options:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-lang " lang"
Filter by language.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output as NDJSON.
.RE
.RE

.TP
.BR "context " \fI<name>\fR
Extract the full source code of a symbol's definition by reading the
original file. If multiple definitions match, all are printed separated
by a blank line.

.RS
.B Output format (default):
.RS
# path:startLine-endLine
<source lines>
.RE

.B Options:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-kind " kind"
Disambiguate by symbol kind.
.TP
.BI \-\-lang " lang"
Disambiguate by language.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output as NDJSON with a \fIsource\fR field containing the code inline.
.RE
.RE

.TP
.B stats
Print a summary of the indexed database: file count by language,
symbol count by kind, reference count, database size, and last indexed
timestamp.

.TP
.B list-files
List all indexed files, one per line.

.RS
.B Output format:
.RS
language TAB path
.RE

.B Options:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-lang " lang"
Filter by language.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output as NDJSON.
.RE
.RE

.TP
.B list-symbols
List all symbols in the index, one per line.

.RS
.B Output format:
.RS
kind TAB name TAB path TAB startLine-endLine
.RE

.B Options:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-file " path"
Filter to symbols defined in a specific file. Recommended on large repos.
.TP
.BI \-\-kind " kind"
Filter by symbol kind.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output as NDJSON.
.RE
.RE

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BI \-\-db " path"
Path to the SQLite database. Applies to all commands. Default: ./code-indexer.db

.TP
.B \-\-json
Output data as newline-delimited JSON (NDJSON). Each line is a valid,
independently parseable JSON object. Not a JSON array. Applies to all
query commands.

.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage summary and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-llm
Print the extended LLM usage guide to stdout and exit. Works as a standalone
flag (\fBcode-indexer --llm\fR) or combined with the help command
(\fBcode-indexer help --llm\fR). Covers recommended workflows, token cost
guidelines, and usage patterns optimized for language model consumption.

.SH OUTPUT CONVENTIONS

Data is always written to
.B stdout.
Progress messages, warnings, and errors are always written to
.B stderr.
These streams are never mixed.

Default output is tab-delimited text, one record per line. This makes
output composable with standard Unix tools:

.RS
.nf
# Count how many files reference a symbol
code-indexer find-refs MyClass | cut -f1 | sort -u | wc -l

# Find the most-referenced symbols
code-indexer list-symbols | while IFS=$'\\t' read kind name path lines; do
  count=$(code-indexer find-refs "$name" | wc -l)
  printf "%s\\t%s\\t%s\\n" "$count" "$kind" "$name"
done | sort -rn | head -10

# Get all class definitions as JSON
code-indexer list-symbols --kind class --json
.fi
.RE

Exit code is 0 on success (including empty results), 1 on error.
Empty results are not an error.

.SH LANGUAGES

.TP
.B TypeScript / TSX
Extensions: .ts, .tsx
Extracted kinds: function, class, interface, method, type, enum, variable
.br
Note: \fBvariable\fR captures only module-level and class-level
.BR const / let
declarations. Local variables inside function bodies are not indexed.

.TP
.B Kotlin / KTS
Extensions: .kt, .kts
Extracted kinds: function, class, object, property
.br
Note: \fBproperty\fR captures only file-level and class/object-level
declarations. Local vals inside function bodies are not indexed.

.SH FILES

.TP
.I ./code-indexer.db
Default SQLite database. Created automatically on first index run.

.SH NOTES

.B find-symbol
uses exact name matching. To find symbols when you do not know the exact
name, use grep as a fuzzy search layer:
.RS
.nf
code-indexer list-symbols | grep -i keyword
code-indexer list-symbols --kind class | grep -i auth
.fi
.RE
then
.B context\ <name>
to retrieve the source.

TypeScript
.BR namespace\ Foo\ {}
declarations are not indexed.

.B list-symbols
without
.B --file
or
.B --kind
can return thousands of lines on large repos. Always filter.

References extracted by
.B find-refs
are structural (AST-based) and do not include occurrences in comments
or string literals. This is intentional: the results represent actual
code references, not textual occurrences.

.SH EXAMPLES

Index a project:
.RS
.nf
code-indexer index ./my-project
code-indexer index ./my-project --db ./my-project.db
.fi
.RE

Find a class definition:
.RS
.nf
code-indexer find-symbol UserService
code-indexer find-symbol UserService --kind class --lang typescript
.fi
.RE

Read the source of a symbol:
.RS
.nf
code-indexer context UserService
code-indexer context UserService --lang kotlin --json
.fi
.RE

Explore an unfamiliar file:
.RS
.nf
code-indexer list-symbols --file src/services/authService.ts
.fi
.RE

Find all usages of a function:
.RS
.nf
code-indexer find-refs parseUser
code-indexer find-refs parseUser | cut -f1 | sort -u
.fi
.RE

LLM usage guide:
.RS
.nf
code-indexer help --llm
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grep (1),
.BR sqlite3 (1),
.BR jq (1)

.SH AUTHOR
code-indexer was built as an MVP for token-efficient LLM code navigation.
